when I arrived in early October the corn well it was frozen they had an early frost that year so you couldn't get much data out of it and they had a few small plots of wheat that Dr. Harard planted and that was all frosted we didn't get any data so not much happened that first planting season of
even of 44.
But we did plant that falls, a few limited samples of wheat.
Dr. Wellhausen and I went out onto a couple of farms and a couple of old, beat-up experiment stations that had been established and made some limited plantings of wheat, maybe in December.
And Bill Caldwell and I, who was still there, the agronomist soils person, we put in a couple of fertilizer experiments out on farms.
But we planted on the station in Chapingo where we were working, developing this experimental station.
I ran the boundary surveys on it on the roads.
I was an old forester and so I, this was part of my training and I ran the boundary surveys and the canals and location and all of these sorts of things in the early months.
We made some plantings so that we could begin crossing our wheat plots.
This was done in December of 44.
And in the spring of 45, we began making the crosses and whatnot.
And Wellhausen was getting ready to make his corn plantings.
So the real effective first plantings were made in the fall of 44 in wheat and in corn.
in the spring of 45.
The 44 ones were killed by frost in both cases, so they really didn't accomplish much.
And during the first year of 45, I worked on wheat, and then I helped Dr. Wellhausen in the disease problems on corn as well.
And I started working on the bean and insect and disease problems both with some young people who were assigned to me.
did some of the early spray and dust work on insects, on beans, a study of the diseases that seemed to be most important.
We were growing.
And Dr. Wellhausen sent out people to collect all the bean varieties he could lay hands on that were grown in different parts also.
He handled both the corn and the beans.
And Harar was directly in charge of the wheat.
But by the spring of 45, one day he came and he said, look,
He says, we're going to build this program.
I've got a job on my hands here to find staff and the right ones and thousand details and trying to get the linkages with the Mexican government right, and he says, take it over and see what you can do with it.
And so, that's- So, he had to do more of the administrative bureaucratic type jobs.
Yes.
And so, that allowed you to do more scientific
In the pioneering part of it, it was a good job and Herrera was a tremendous organizer and I think in a large part the success of the Mexican program goes back to his vision and his insights into what was needed for the future.
I'm sure he had good counseling from Stakeman Mangelsdorf from Bradfield in the early times, but he was an innovative person and he
knew how to get the orders of priorities right, and he was a great handler of people.
He had antennae that transmitted sensitivities, and yet he was firm when he needed to be, and that's the kind of personality he was.
So, that's the way it all started.
Of course, I soon became
involved in the pretty largely in wheat we added a small program in barley and oats also but there's one thing that shows I think that's an interesting thing that first summer we had put in the spray and dust test on control of insects and diseases on beans we had this
Big bean collection, I think we had about 1800 collections.
Some of them were duplicates, but we had taken notes on them several times during the course of the season for leaf diseases, foliar diseases, for insect damage, and we were pulling them all up looking at the root rot.
This was in October, maybe mid-October, at the main station there at Chipingo.
There had been frost ten days or so before.
The corn rustling dry, there was a pretty good wind breeze blowing.
And there came one of those whirlwind dust devils across one corner of the unplanted thing.
You could see the dust kicking out and whirling up.
It came across the cornfield and tore the leaves off.
And it did this when we had about half an hour's work left to finish this whole year's
work on classifying all of these bean diseases, insects, and the root rot.
And when we went over to eat our sandwich, we put the notebook, and it had all of the notes for the whole year on all of these experiments.
We had snap-covered notebooks at that time, not the spiral, but snap-covered, and all of these loose sheets, a hundred and some pages.
We put it at the head of the row on the last
a row that we pulled out of the bean plants, and we put a little stool that we were working with on top of it, went over and sat under an ash tree over there to eat our sandwich and drink our thermos of coffee.
And that whirlwind came through and went across the corn, and we sat there looking, and then it swung over in this direction, went right across this place where the beans were, and picked up that notebook and took it up in the air, how it took it that high, and then it jerked it open.
And all of those sheets went up there.
The last you saw most of them, they were the size of a cigarette paper.
No kidding.
And we looked everywhere.
We put out, and that was a lot of money at that time.
First we started with whatever it was, 50 centavos a sheet.
I thought the students around the college would pick them up.
Then it went up to a peso, which was, at that time,
85 pesos to a dollar, and then we went to five pesos.
All we recovered was about five sheets.
The rest were gone with the wind.
That was my first real experience there.
That had an impact for the rest of the years.
All the notebooks, not just in Mexico, but every one of the Rockefeller programs where it was spun off, all of those notebooks had a screw through them.
with washers on it so that this wouldn't happen again.
But it's a curious little insight into some of the disasters that can happen.
In other words, what was lost was all the research information that you had taken for a year?
On the beans.
And how did you ever replace that?
Well, you just lost a year.
We had reserved seed of these.
So you could grow them out.
And we remembered some of the best treatments, for example, of fungicides or insecticides.
But the details, the exact note.
We had enough notes that could have published the first paper on the use of DDT as an insecticide.
It was very effective.
I took a few little samples with me out of DuPont when I went there.
And it was beautiful data.
It all went up in that thing.
The role of nature and history.
Yes, sir.
According to some of our environmentalists of today, everything is in balance with Mother Nature, but it seems to me she gets out of balance pretty often and she does some pretty curious things.
It's interesting that the person who was doing this work, especially on this one insect, the
weevil of beans, which was a very destructive pest, and it was practically unknown.
Nobody had studied the biology, and he was doing that too, and he had some of those sheets in there, and then the spray really affected.
He was going to use it for his thesis, for his enginirogronement, and it went up there.
Poor guy, he cried like a little boy.
I don't blame him.
It set him back a whole year.
As a matter of fact, he was one of the best young scientists we had.
He eventually became the technical director of the new ENYA and one of the outstanding scientists.
That's the way he got baptized.
Of course, later I saw this happen.
I had many things happen in subsequent years just to show what can happen in the beauties of research where everything is supposed to be orderly.
On a weekend,
Several years later, where we had backcross material, which means that you had worked several generations in backcrossing, and it was elite material, small plot, where we were making another backcross.
Friday night, the late Dr. Joe Rupert and I were working this Saturday afternoon.
We went home.
We came back Monday morning, and there had been a whole herd of donkeys, burros in there, and they ate it right down to the ground.
About 25 years and 20 years later over in India, when we had the seed multiplication over there, we had elephant trouble.
They'd come around and walk right through the fences.
Get in there and pick that stuff up and throw it in every direction.
So it can range, and then birds of course everywhere.
So it can be whirlwinds, it can be burrows, it can be elephants, or it can be birds.
So it's not such a tranquil life as one would think sometimes.
It's a different type of laboratory than most people talk about.
That's right.
There are lots of variables you can't control.
Of course, hailstorms have been hailed out completely several times.
I want to go back to the Foreign Technical Assistance Program.
Okay.
Now, how did this become more formalized in the United States government?
This program
The original Rockefeller Program was established in 1943, early, late January, early February, and it was organized as a special office, the Office of Special Studies, semi-autonomous within the Secretary of Agriculture.
This gave us the autonomy to move without all of the bureaucracy.
Had we been put directly under an old line agency, we'd have been tied to the bureaucracy.
This gave us a great deal of autonomy, and the government's funds went into a fund that was controlled by this office, but in a joint, jointly, the Rockefeller funds went into it too.
And because you had two different funding agencies, is that why you had more autonomy?
Well, first of all, probably in a large part because of the Rockefeller contributions.
But the Mexican government was surprisingly flexible.
They established this fund, Fedocomiso, which is a joint thing where you have joint control of the account in the bank.
And never once was there any criticism.
Of course, it was handled very carefully.
Never any questions asked about how the way those funds were administered from the beginning till the end.
Now, this program was established in 43.
The Marshall Plan came into being in 1949, so it preceded it by six years.
The .4 program, which evolved eventually, .4 under
President Harry Truman's address to the nation in 49.
No, both of those are 48, weren't they?
No, the funding.
Oh, you're talking funding, okay.
By the time the funding came out.
By the time the funding came, the Marshall Plan came on stream in 49.
Yeah, okay.
And 0.4 came on stream in 1950.
I think that's right.
I have it in my notes here.
That's the way I remember.
So, it was six or seven years before.
So this Office of Special Studies then was part of the Department of Agriculture in its own way.
Ex officio.
Oh, exactly.
For about six years before it was officially taken over.
No, it was this, the whole time.
Okay.
Until it finished its duty, the Officina de Studio Specialis was the label we operated under, until the job was done in 1960, 17 years.
For example, all the vehicles we had carried the seal, the Ministry of Agriculture seal.
From that standpoint, they were official, but we really weren't.
But we never had any difficulties this way.
I think this was largely because the way Harar structured it, and I'm sure that Stakeman was very influential because he spoke Spanish very well and always when he would visit,
He was on a pretty personal basis as the secretaries, even the presidents.
This is not to deny the importance of Mangelsdorf and Bradfield, but when you can communicate in their own language, it opens lots of, it transmits better, the feelings.
Okay, where were we?
We're talking about the late 1940s, early 1950s, and how the Office of Special Studies is dealing with, and the Mexican government, and how their type of administration, just basically what we're trying to find out is the chain of command, how things worked.
Okay.
We had a great deal of freedom in those times.
We had very little physical equipment.
Yeah.
When we started that first summer, Harar found one little old tractor.
It was miserable.
It was a Montgomery War tractor that hadn't been sold, I guess, because it was that bad during the war.
But he forgot it.
And so Wellhausen had used this.
It scratched.
It didn't have any power, a miserable job of plowing.
But that first summer before when I arrived, 43, he had planted with that.
And then that fall of 44, we went out to a junkyard in the government bank, Wellhausen and I, we couldn't buy tractors.
The old government bank, the Heidel Bank, and we found two old TD-9 international cat tractors.
So we got permission to take both of them.
We scavengerized one and made a tractor that would go
for plowing and for heavy work, and we did the same thing for one other tractor.
I think an old International Farmall.
It was before the G. No, it was an International, not a John Deere.
It was an International.
I don't remember the model.
Those were the first tractors.
We only had first one vehicle for the three or four of us.
So we had to have an order of how we were going to use it and what was most important and where we were going to travel, and we were restricted because of that.
But eventually, in a couple of years, we began to get some pickups and some better equipment.
Before we talk about the equipment and the problems, we're going to talk about the problems.
The immediate equipment problems.
all of those things.
But we want to get back to that topic that we were on and that was the funding from the government, the American government, through the Marshall Plan, the Food for Peace.
In other words, how the Foreign Technical Assistance Program was developed.
I did hear the other day and I
can't lay hands on it now, it's here and I'll get you a copy.
Sort of a boiled down version of the expenditures of the Rockefeller Foundation, its own contribution to the program in Mexico from 43 to 61 when it was closed down.
The total expenditures for operations for staff salaries for fellowships
including for the establishment of the first graduate school for studies in agricultural science at Chapingo, the first in Latin America, added up to six in a fraction millions of dollars over those 17 years time.
Six million dollars?
Six in a fraction, less than seven.
That's all?
That's all.
and to show the returns, that one crop increase over the base period last year in India, from 400 million bushels to a billion, 400 million bushels, fourfold increase, depending on how you calculate it, but it was worth somewhere between, in gross national product increase above the base period, was worth somewhere between five and six billion dollars.
So, as you can see, that was in one crop, one year in one country.
Mexico many times paid for itself just on the change there, but just to kind of bring it into focus.
I think the budget, the first, and I have that on that sheet too.
Remind me before you leave, we'll dig it up.
I think the budget for the first three years for the whole operations and that was
getting things going, was less than $200,000, something on that order.
And that was from the Rockefeller Foundation, and how much, do you remember how much
that the Mexican government put in?
The Mexican government, I can't give you the breakdown, but most of theirs was payment of salaries in part, some for all of these young trainees, but most of it was written off in given land, in giving certain physical facilities to carry on the work, and you had to put some kind of a value on it so that you could see if it was in balance.
So I can't put that on a peso or dollar basis.
How about as far as construction was concerned?
The first building we had was adobe with a tar paper roof made from nothing.
We made our own fence post out of cement the same way.
Wood is expensive and it wasn't until 1949 that we built the first building at this Experiment Station headquarters in
on the ground at Chipingo, that is, the land belonged to the National College of Agriculture, but it hadn't been used for experimental work, and actually it hadn't been used in production.
It was kind of abandoned, a good share of it.
That was the state of the art at the School of Agriculture, too, at the time.
And, of course, the first, in 1945 especially, then we started putting
experiments both in corn and wheat out on farms.
We didn't have the right places to develop agricultural experiment stations.
We didn't know what we needed to measure.
There were a few old abandoned or nearly abandoned experiment stations scattered around and poorly equipped.
We put a few tests on those, but a lot of them we went into the areas that looked like they were important
agriculturally, production-wise speaking, and we would get land from farmers to put in the test on corn breeding plots, or wheat, fertilizer tests, and so on.
That's the way we operated in 1543.
Often in the early days, you would use other people's land, their private land.
Most of it was done on the farmers' fields, their land, given to us.
Oh, so they deeded the land deal.
just for use oh they just said come on on our ranch and plant some yeah okay and you see this is what many of the people in the new institutes today they write bulletins about on-farm testing hell we did that from the second year we were in operation and lots of them but it's a rediscovery of the wheel really and i should say that when i was given the job for looking at the wheat production i traveled the countryside with my poor spanish
looking at where we could produce enough wheat to feed Mexico, and their production was very small at the time when I started there.
It was only three hundred and forty-five thousand tons, which is a few million bushels.
Be a third of thirty-seven, ten million, eleven million bushels, nothing.
They were importing, and with population growing like it was, it had to look elsewhere.
And among the places I visited was Ciudad Obregón, Sonora, Mexico, the Yaqui Valley.
This is where I found, I don't know if we mentioned this when we talked about Rodolfo Caiz, son of the president, the governor of the state of Sonora, who had set up this beautiful experiment station, it must have been, when he became governor in 1934.
And I found it in ruins.
Then would this be the place to interject this?
So I saw this beautiful valley on the west coast of Mexico, the Yaqui Valley, the Valley of the Yaqui River.
It then had one dam on the river, Langostura, up towards Douglas, Arizona.
Okay, and when did you see this?
I went up there the first time in
The spring of 45.
Okay.
And I have worked there every year since.
I went because I had been reading that this, looking at the old data, probably not very reliable, but that this had been growing a lot of wheat after the canal was brought in.
which came into operation in 1939.
And I knew that there'd been some disastrous stem rust epidemics there in 39, 40, and 41, which I found out about when I got up there.
There was then not much enthusiasm for wheat.
The area was very limited, and during those war years they had shifted over to flax because they had lost most of their crop three years in a row on rust, stem rust.
And so they were in flax and in summer with the wild waters in the river because there was a lot of volume that came down that couldn't be handled by that one dam or that came into the river below.
And they had big borders two or three meters deep where when the wild water would come they would flood.
And then when the water went down, this was in the higher parts of the valleys that were not really irrigated, not controlled irrigation.
When the water went down in September or October they'd plant wheat.
They didn't give it any irrigation.
But in part of that land, when the wild water came, they plant rice.
So I was impressed, and I figured that, and I had gone to, taken the trouble to find out what the plans were for irrigation in the next 20 years, where the government was planning to put dams.
And I could see that there, in Sonora, in the next state south, Sinaloa,
There was good water resources.
The land was favorable for a week.
There were serious disease problems.
The farmers were receptive, except for the disasters.
I went to see this station, and it was a shambles.
But, subsequently, I found out how it was built from the family who would become completely disillusioned with the agricultural scientists because of what had happened.
This had been established when Don Rodolfo Elias Callis became governor in 1934.
He was the son of General Plutarco Elias Callis, who had been one of the revolutionary generals.
He and Obergon, both of them became presidents of Mexico and they came from that area.
They commanded in the revolution Yaqui, Indian troops, and they were tough, and played a pretty important role in the revolution.
Subsequently, Obregón became president first, and Cayis, Plutarco, the father of the
person I'm speaking about became the second president after the revolution and actually also the founder of PRI, Partido Revolucionario Instituciones.
He was in 1928 he established PRI.
But his son was a farmer also and a highly intelligent person and he used to like to visit Arizona and California and look at their agriculture.
I'm sure this is what gave him
The idea that we had to have an experimental station because this was long before I was there.
Sure.
But he used to visit the stations in California, Arizona.
And so he had bought a hundred hectares of land, irrigated, completely irrigated, a good set of buildings.
for the headquarters buildings and barns and stables, beautiful, that were shambles when I saw them, but you could tell from the architecture and the layout that there was some good planning.
He had stocked it with blooded shorthorns and Holsteins and with two races of hogs, several kinds of poultry, beautiful
orchard with a whole series of species, different kinds of fruits, small but halfway decent staff houses for the scientists and for the workers.
But he only had one scientist who was there the first two years and he
planted a few wheats, and from this he picked out one that did very well compared to the rest.
It was the variety Mentana that was bred in Italy back in the late 20s, I believe it was, by Strompele, who was a famous wheat breeder in Italy at that time.
And this variety did very well, and so he released it and distributed it, but he never had a dynamic breeding program backing it up.
Then he was called to Mexico to organize what was called the Office of
experimental stations, which was a very small, modest thing, very modest budget, and they didn't have any competence at all to put in charge of it.
Came along the rust epidemic about two years later, 39, worse than 40 and 41, and they had no wheat to replace it with, and then that's the environment.
The rust just devastated the wheat in this Obergon area?
All the bread wheat, there was some mixtures of... So much Italian strain.
Yeah, because there was nothing wrong with what he did, but he didn't have a program to back it up.
If he had, and he would have seen that this was changing, he would have gotten one of those out probably after the first year.
and they avoided it but that wasn't in the mix at that time and so when I arrived wheat was looked on as a miserable crop and worse yet.
By the farmers in the area they were scared of it.
The good ones especially, the good farmers and especially because he was one of the good farmers and three or four of his buddies were also the best and what was worse to be an agricultural scientist was
miserable they would hardly to me they would they would treat me decently because I was a foreigner and I couldn't speak their language except words here and there but and they were less brutal than the farmers in central Mexico where they had had troubles too I heard them insult some of the young
colleagues that was working with me that were fresh out of school saying, look, you agricultural scientists are social parasites.
You feed from the taxes which we pay and you give us nothing in return.
Bunch of bureaucrats.
This was the general attitude.
Now in Sonora they are more sophisticated in that way.
I never heard that, but the sort of standoffishness told you
All you needed to know that you weren't trusted.
Yeah.
And it was a long road back.
The only way we gained it was by developing these varieties in a hurry.
Before, I haven't talked to you about the shuttle breeding either, have I?
No, we haven't got to that, but I want to stay here at Obergon.
Okay.
I want to hear this.
This station was about, the old station was about,
30 kilometers, about 18, 20 miles out on a dirt road, which at harvest time was that deep in dust.
In summer, when it rained or when the river would overflow, it was mud that deep.
There were no rural schools in the area at the time.
The water was full of salt, and the one well that was there was, well, I guess you could drink it, but it was miserable.
What elevation?
That's about 39 meters.
It's about 100 feet, 120 feet above sea level.
That's on a flat coastal plain.
Do you have a mountain?
Beautiful land.
I'll try to dig one out.
Okay, yeah, let's describe where it is.
Hermesillo is the capital of the state of Sonora.
It's about 140 miles south of Nogales, Arizona.
But it's not in the valley, it's in a small valley.
Then you move on south to the port of Guaymas, which has been and still is quite a popular tourist resort.
And about how far is it from that port?
From that port, it's about 60 miles south on the coastal plain, on the Pan American Highway now.
about sixty miles south of Goimas, it's about 120 miles, 130 miles south of Hermosillo, big flat valley.
At the present time, in that early time, it had about, with one dam in operation that went into operation in 1939, I think it was irrigating only about
150,000 hectares of land.
A second dam was built and if I think that in years when there's a good runoff and when there's stored up to capacity, it can irrigate about 400,000 hectares.
Most years it doesn't do that.
What's been worse in recent years in the land reforms, the political officers
against the advice of the hydraulics engineers and the agronomists, there's more land, good land, than there is water for that land.
And what the politician always does is to say, all right, we'll open more land.
So you divert more of the water there and you get less water for the rest and it produces less food in the long run.
So it's a salve for social problems.
Yeah.
Population pressures.
And I've been through that one several times.
But tell me about, tell me about when you got there now, what did you do?
Did you just go around and start talking to the major ranchers in the area?
Or did you realize that that's where you wanted to set up a station or rebuild or?
Yes.
As soon as I saw this area.
Okay, 1945, yeah.
45.
I made contact with the man who had then
been sent there in charge of that old rundown station.
Not the one was there when the disaster struck.
He had been displaced, and I'm not sure it wasn't necessarily his responsibility or his fault.
But this other man was enthusiastic, ill-prepared.
He had an old beat-up pickup that would stand to break down more time than not, but we drove around the valley and I collected
spikes from all the different kinds of wheats that I could see.
I looked at the disease problems and looked at the other crops and tried to get as much of a field as possible.
It was in probably early April, which is when it's approaching harvest.
I took these back to Mexico where we had been working for and where we were to begin the big
bush on the wheat breeding at Chipingo at the station headquarters.
I should say that also that fall I have planted in farmers fields the fall before several places including in the so-called Bajillo area which is the old central part of colonial Mexico at about 5,600 feet elevation.
It's primarily corn country.
Now in recent years because of the way the cities have grown a lot of it's been converted into vegetables and
alfalfa for milk production and so on, but at that time it was primarily grains, corn, wheat in winter, corn in summer, wheat, beans and so on.
And so I was working there and so I took these samples back and with me and we had from the fall plantings of that year we had
also made some of the earliest crosses in March of 45.
And I added each of those heads in plots that summer to see what they were like in rust reaction.
I kept part of the seed, fortunately.
Most of them died from the rust in the summer when it rains every day.
But I tried to pick out some that I thought would be useful parents.
The next year I collected
thousands of heads of all through central Mexico on the farms.
Some of these were very old types that probably went back to colonial times.
We didn't have any facilities for keeping the dam weevils would eat us up and all sorts of things.
We picked out several of the best ones, and I had at that time, I guess it was in 40, I said 46, didn't I?
This must have been, yes, when we made the collection, and in 40,
Seven, I asked Dr. B.B.
Bales of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture to come down and spend a month with me to look at these classification of these, all these old weeds that I had growing in short rows derived from the heads that I picked.
And so he spent a month and he was very good and an experienced, not only breeder, but a good agronomist.
He knew practical things.
So, and by this time, I was afraid of this rust, you see.
Sure.
I knew that, hell, that I wasn't going to have 11 years, which was the standard one you made one generation a year.
Before, I had a disaster like had happened three years, 39, 40, and 41.
Yeah.
So one of the first decisions when I saw this Sonora area, I knew we had to make a strong pitch there because it had the potential to produce a lot of wheat.
and I had been already working in the high valleys near Mexico City, and I had tests going in the Bay Hill so-called area, 5,600 feet, and I'd drawn some out in Tehuacán in Puebla, which is a dry area, and so I decided I had to find a way to get two generations a year and try to produce a variety in four and a half years, five years at the most.
So I hit on the idea,
have another epidemic and get thrown the hell out of the country as a fracasal, like we say in Spanish, or someone who's a failure.
And of course the textbooks said you shouldn't do this at that time.
The dogma was that whether in corn or in wheat,
you had to cross, especially you had to make the selections from segregating populations and grow them in the area where you were going to sow them commercially, so that you got the right fit of the so-called genotype, the genetic entity that you selected out, and the soil and the climate environment.
That was the way it had to be when I was a graduate student.
That's what all the books said.
Doesn't that sound like it makes sense?
Yes.
But what you were doing was raising wheat in, what, four different areas in Mexico with four different climates and four different soils.
Is that right?
Eventually went up to seven.
Okay, seven.
But the two key ones that I tried to exploit earliest was from Sonora, Cidad Obregón, where we planted when the farmer would plant mid-up,
The first half of November then, now we plant the last days of November or the first week in December because the varieties are earlier maturing.
But at that time we would plant no later than the middle of November, sometimes the first week.
At 28 degrees latitude is where Cidad de Obregun is located.
And it's at 120 feet above sea level.
And when we planted in November, which is when the farmers would plant, the days were getting shorter.
We would harvest in April.
and picking from those segregating populations, which were the result of crosses, handmade crosses, made the best plants, both from the standpoint of disease resistance, that had the best straw, which was inadequate at that time, they grew too tall, but nevertheless the best that was available.
The earliest possible types to try to escape rust, but also to conserve irrigation water, to be used on other crops.
good grain characteristics that would be accepted by the milling and baking industry.
We didn't have any laboratories.
We'd have to send them out the first few years to have them tested.
USDA helped us, and also General Mills in Minneapolis, small samples, a few of them.
So you got General Mills and USDA, huh?
Before we got our laboratory set up.
So contemporary wisdom was you plant in one place, the geotype.
Sure, right.
Genotype, we call it.
G-E-N-O-T-Y-P-E.
That's the fixed entity with genetic characteristic.
So I'd harvest in August, or in April, last days of April.
And I knew that I had to plant early in May or I'd get frosted before the seed would mature in the high valleys.
So I'd take that seed.
and plant part of it.
Every seed that came from one plant in a short row in Chopingo and a few years later at Toluca.
First at Chopingo it's about 7,500 feet elevation.
Then we moved to 8,500 feet a few years later in Toluca because we got more rain there and we could get better disease selection.
So we'd plant there and no later than the 10th of May when the days were getting longer.
And there we were planting at 18 degrees latitude, which meant that we had moved it 700 miles south.
The day lengths were getting longer in one case and shorter in the other.
And we would select the best plants each cycle in those different locations.
Best for disease resistance— Longer in May and shorter in November is what you're talking about.
And so we would select the best adapted plants that seemed to grow vigorously, big heads.
The grain was plump.
They had disease resistance, the best combination we could get.
They were not immune, but better than the rest.
But we were particularly interested in stem rust, one that destroyed.
There were other diseases that you couldn't select for.
You have to have an order of priorities on disease.
You can't work on all of them at once or you get nothing done.
And so we moved them back and forth, alternate generations.
We got two generations a year.
The result was that we had beautiful varieties compared to the old in three and a half years.
And at the same time... Instead of the normal level?
Level.
But it took us another year and a half to get them in fairly good multiplication.
Okay.
At the same time that we tested them the second time and the third time,
we were already multiplying ones that we thought were the best, and they turned out to be.
And that second year also, in 48, Bales came back again to look at the classification of these things, and I took him with me to Sonora, and he traveled in the different parts, and I showed him these, and he said, run with them.
So, we'd already started to multiply them.
So, they went out on farms,
in small plots, or in three farms, including the ex-governor, Rodolfo Caius, and two of his best friends, because I know one of his best friends.
And then two other farmers, one the next door neighbor, who was kind enough to loan us machinery to plow the plots, because the machinery was non-functional.
And he said, oh, they're going, they just couldn't do anything.
And so he would plow it for us,
He would help us.